http 80
tcp/ip 3360
ftp 21 for command port and 20 data port
tftp 69
telnet 23
udp
pop3 110
smtp 587

FTP is a connection oriented and TFTP is connectionless service
FTP uses TCP port while TFTP uses UDP port
FTP works on two ports 21 and 20 while TFTP works on one port i.e. 69

TCP is connection oriented while UDP is connectionless service
Connection oriented means the communicating devices should establish a communicati0n  before transmitting the data
TCP is slower that UDP while UDP is fast simple and more efficient to use
TCP example:- FTP, SSH, and Telnet
UDP example:- online games, video conferencing, 
Types of network: LAN, MAN, WAN
Wired and Wireless network: wired network means, wires are used to connect the devices such as PCs or laptops to internet or various other networks.
                                                    wireless means without wire, media that is made up of elctro magnetic waves. Anteenas or sensors will be present on all wirelss devices.

Encryption(Cipher Text) is the process of converting the readable msg into unreadable msgs to prevent form unauthorized person from reading it.
Decryption(Plain Text) means converting the encrypted msg back to its original format.

In connection-oriented service, Handshake method is used to establish the connection between sender and receiver. Connection-less service is related to the postal system.
It does not include any connection establishment and connection termination.

Symmetrical connection provides equal download and upload speeds.
An asymmetrical connection, however, does NOT have equal download/upload speeds.

The main objective of router is to connect various networks simultaneously.
While the main objective of switch is to connect various devices simultaneously.
Router works in network layer, while switch it works in data link layer.

DES(data encryption standard) is a symmetric key algorithm, which uses the same key for encrypting and decrypting process.
RSA is an asymmetric algorithm used for services such as digital signatures, key excahnges and for encryption purposes.
Diffie Hellman algorithm is a method of securely exchanging the cyptographic keys.

Cyber security can e used to protect the systems, networks, programs, devices and data from cyber attacks.
Cyber Security is a broad term while network security is a subset of cyber security. Cybersecurity protects all the digital data against cyber attacks.
Network security offers limited protection and safeguards the network and transmit data only
CN includes viruses and worms whereas security includes phishing and texting.

L1-physical-TCP/UDP
L2-data link-IPV5,IPV6
L3-network-ATM,Fibre Cable, 
L4-transport-ISDN

OSPF (Open Shortest Path First) is a router protocol used to find the best path for packets as they pass through a set of connected networks.
IP address is of 32 bits.
Encryption uses 54 bits
Two types of keys private and public. In private only one key is used for both encryption and decryption while in publich two keys are used
one for encryption and other for decryption.

Computer networking refers to interconnected computing devices that can exchange data and share resources with each other.
OR
computer network, two or more computers that are connected with one another for the purpose of communicating data electronically.

